Now it's rolling.
So let us commence without further ado.
Would you please give us a little bit of your background, how you grew up, how you got interested
in science fiction, and why you write science fiction now?
Well, actually, I started reading science fiction kind of late compared to a lot of people
because when I was growing up, well, I didn't know very much about science fiction.
I'd never read any of it to speak of.
And about the first science fiction I ever read in depth was H.G. Wells, which I was reading
because I was interested in him, and I was also interested in writing a paper on him
for a class I was taking in high school.
So that was what got me started, and it wasn't until I was in college that I really started
reading a lot of science fiction.
I really found out how many writers there were.
I thought that basically that was, you know, Alice Huxley or H.G. Wells, you know, and
a few writers who would sort of do a science fictional or utopian or satirical kind of
book, and I didn't really know about any of the other stuff until a lot later.
So I don't know if that answers your question.
Yeah, yeah, that answers it fine.
What is your definition of science fiction?
I don't really have one.
I mean, I think it's pretty obvious what it is when you look at it, that it deals with
times other than the here and now, usually things in the future or in an alternate world
or whatever, but I get very annoyed and very impatient with definitions anyway.
Unfortunately, I think a lot of what defines science fiction is that it's a publisher's
category.
Basically, the publisher's to say, well, this is science fiction, we'll publish it as science
fiction.
It's a publisher's category, and I don't think writers really think of it quite as much
as the publishers do.
I think most writers would probably rather that the books were just thought of as novels
that just happen to be a little more distant from present day life than other kinds of
books.
What?
Your background is in philosophy.
Was that a good discipline from which to write science fiction?
Probably.
But I think that almost anything would be a good discipline from which to write science
fiction or anything else probably.
I think what's useful about philosophy is that it's, I think, oh, jeez, I'm stuttering.
Maybe I'd better start this over again.
Yeah, go right ahead.
Okay.
I think the best thing about philosophy as a training is that it teaches you to sort
out reasonable sorts of ideas or consistent sorts of ideas from things that are just completely
bizarre or ridiculous.
That's probably one of the best things about it.
And it's also the kind of thing that I don't think you can study for very long unless you
become interested in other things.
Now, I know a lot of people nowadays would probably disagree with that because the trend
in philosophy has been towards the analytic school and the sort of thing that has almost
no relation to anything, symbolic logic and that sort of thing, where it becomes very,
very abstract.
That's been the trend.
I was always sort of at odds with that because my interest was more in the history of philosophy
and in particular in ancient philosophy.
I was taking Greek so that I could read the stuff properly.
And I was a lot more interested in that kind of thing.
That's not the general trend of modern day philosophy at all, but that was my interest.
And that particular kind of thing I think is probably useful.
At least I learned how to do a lot of research because the kind of thing I was doing, I had
to, and it's always useful to know how to do research for writing science fiction.
A number of your works have biological themes as well as the anthologies you've edited.
Do you have a latent interest in biology?
Well, I probably do.
I took a special course in it when I was a kid and well, you know, with a lot of other
students who were ticked to take a certain course.
And I did pretty well in that.
It was one of the few sciences I did do well and I took a little bit of it in college,
although not very much.
And I suppose if I had gone into a science that would have been the one I would have gone into.
So that's probably affected my topics for us.
Were you ever tempted to stay in academia and teach philosophy?
Well, I was thinking of doing that.
That was why I was in grad school, but it became pretty obvious after a while that there weren't going to be any jobs in the field.
And that it would have been years spent working towards the doctorate and then trying to find a job and probably not being able to find one.
I have serious doubts as to whether I could have found any kind of permanent job or any kind of reasonable job.
I probably would have been one of those part-time migrating academics.
And that didn't exactly appeal to me.
I have to admit.
But I have thought of going into it.
There seems to be even less government support for the social sciences now than there ever was.
And of course, when you were in school, it wasn't all that good anyway.
I would tend to think that's kind of an alarming trend.
Yes, it is.
I mean, now in my case, I don't really feel that bad about it.
Looking back at it, I don't suppose I ever would have been a terrific philosopher to begin with.
I probably would have been second rate.
But as far as the people who are really gifted in this kind of thing, I think it's probably a tragedy.
And it may take 10 or 20 years before people see it and suddenly realize that there's no one around to teach certain things,
that there's no one around to convey certain kinds of knowledge and that something has been lost.
So that worries me.
Yeah.
Okay, let's start talking about some specific works then.
You started out in print with short stories, which were later collected in Star Shadows.
Should beginning writers try to establish themselves by writing short stories before they move on to something else?
Well, that depends because one of the advantages of a short story, obviously, for a beginning writer,
is that you can start it and finish it and have some immediate reinforcement.
You're more likely to be able to sit and sustain the effort to finish a short story, which is hard enough to begin with.
It's hard enough just to sit down and finish a story, let alone sit and write a novel and not know what's going to happen,
and then not know what to do with the thing after you've finished it,
wondering if anyone's even going to look at it, let alone buy it.
And so in a practical sense, it probably makes sense to start out with short stories.
The trouble is, not everybody is a short story writer.
Some writers are basically novelists.
If they try to start out by writing short stories, they may find that somehow the thing feels unfinished,
or that it's really not complete, or that it's not really what the particular writer wants to do.
And in that case, I think it might be better off to try writing a novel, even if it is harder,
just to know that you can sit there and finish it.
Once you've finished the first one, it doesn't guarantee you'll ever write another one,
but it's a big step forward, just to finish it, even if no one buys it.
So I don't know, I think it depends on the particular writer.
I think if you have a particular short story gift, obviously it would help to start out writing short stories.
It means if you present a book to an editor, you're not going to be a complete unknown.
They will have known that the writer has published something, but not everybody can do it.
And there are some writers who have just simply gone right into novel writing to begin with,
and have gone all right at that, and never wrote short stories at all,
or maybe wrote a couple after they had published novels.
In your short story collection, Star Shadows, there were ten stories,
and by my reckoning, which is not guaranteed to be correct,
seven of the ten of them involved relationships between couples,
and the relationships ranged from pretty abysmal ones to a pretty good one,
like in, If Ever I Should Leave You.
This isn't a theme that's usually presented in science fiction stories.
Did you consciously put that in there?
Is that your reason for writing the short stories, to show such relationships?
No, it really wasn't. It just turned out that way.
It's probably just because when I begin to write a story or anything,
I like to have an idea of a particular character,
and usually the character begins...
It sounds strange to put it this way, but usually what happens is the character will begin to speak to me in some way.
I'll begin to get a sense of who this person is.
As I find out more about the character, it's just the character is telling me about her life,
or his life, what's going on in it, what kind of experiences they've had in their childhood, and so forth.
And so if a relationship is in there, it's partly because it may have something to do with the theme of the story,
also, it may reflect the theme of the story in some cases.
But it's also simply because as I write about a character,
it's obvious that I'm going to be filling in certain things about the character's life as I go along.
I didn't consciously set out to say,
well, I am going to write about relationships, and the relationships will reflect the theme of the story, or mirror it, or whatever.
I'm afraid I'm not that conscious of writer, so it just turned out that way.
If I write about couples, or relationships between couples, which I probably have a tendency to do,
it's because that's more familiar to me than a lot of other things.
Obviously, if I weren't part of a couple, then I probably would be writing more about single people,
or about someone else, so that's probably it.
The other emotional theme that I saw in a lot of those stories was empathy,
which is harder to define and harder to write about, I would think.
I assume it came up for the same reason.
Yeah, I think it did.
One of the stories that really interested me in that collection was Gather Blue Roses,
which, again, if I'm right, it inspired at least two paperback covers.
I saw some blue roses on Star Shadows, and then the one on Wondering Stars.
You've made some comments and forwards and things that you have trouble with titles, so I'll ask you about that title.
Where did Gather Blue Roses come from?
Well, that is a good question. I don't really know.
I do know that it has something to do with a particular symbol of trying to forget and trying to forget things.
Obviously, the color blue has quite a lot to do with sadness and with tragedy, which is what that story was about.
I'm sure it has a strange title for the story, probably, but that's it.
I got the title from someone else. I showed him the story and said,
I don't have any kind of title for this. I had a title for it when I started out, which was abysmal,
but I had to put something at the top of the page when I was writing it.
I put a god-awful title on the page and showed it to another writer, and he was the one that gave me the title.
I'll have to assign the credit elsewhere.
Is it true that it is difficult to think of the good catchy titles that editors like and that readers want to read?
It probably isn't for some people, but it is for me. I sometimes wish that there were a title writing workshop that I could go to
so that I could come up with titles. It is a real agony for me.
That is the worst thing about a story for me sometimes, is just coming up with a title.
I've been lucky with a few. I've written a few things for the title, naturally, grew out of the story.
But very often I don't have a title when I start. I know that's strange because I've heard people say that they always have to have a title before they start,
or they can't proceed. I almost never have a title when I start.
But occasionally I'm lucky and a few things have titles that are pretty obvious.
Okay, I now have a trivia question. Three stories that appeared in a row,
Gather Blue Roses, Oasis, and Julio 204, all written in 1971, had a character named Simon in them. Was this just coincidental?
It probably was. It probably was coincidental.
I noticed it at the time myself, and about the only thing I can say about that is that
I don't think I was particularly fixated on the name, but it just seemed that that was the name of that particular character.
And the fact that it occurred three times really is not important as far as I know.
Maybe somebody will do an analysis of it and find out that it is, but as far as I know it has no meaning.
The novel Cloned Lies is an expansion or a fusion of at least three short stories that I could count.
When you started writing the short stories, did you have the idea in the back of your head to go ahead and do a novel eventually?
Not really. Not really. The stories, when I wrote the first story, maybe I should start at the beginning.
When I wrote the first story, I was writing for a particular anthology.
Well, I wasn't really writing for this anthology, but as I was writing the story, an editor told me he might be interested in this particular story.
I wrote that. It occurred to me a few months later that I might want to use the same characters in another story,
since I had become interested in them when I wrote the first one. So I did that.
And the whole thing grew from there. I didn't intend for it to be a novel, which may be a flaw in the book for all I know.
I originally thought of just writing a couple of stories about these characters, and I got more interested in them.
Then I thought maybe of writing a series of stories about them.
And then the novel sort of grew from that. I had to search for a structure for the novel,
which was a little difficult to do, since I had been writing it in pieces, starting in the middle, going to the beginning, moving towards the end.
And to extract a structure from that was a little difficult, but I wouldn't recommend it as a way to write a novel.
It may be a good way to write a first novel, because at least I finished the damn thing.
If I had started out saying I was going to write the book, I might never have gotten to the end.
I might have been too intimidated by the length.
As in many of your short stories, your depiction of the future and Cloned Lies is pretty grim.
Does this reflect your own personal feelings about what we're doing now?
Oh, I'm sure it does. I'm sure it does. I'm somewhat of a pessimist.
When the Clones were born, I was surprised that they were spanked. I would have thought that they would have been born by Le Boyer method or something like that.
You know, now that I think of it, that probably would have been a better method for them.
I mean, given the fact that they were coming out of artificial lungs in the first place, which was probably traumatic enough, for all I know, that probably would have been a gentler method.
Now that I think of it, that's probably something if I were writing it now, I might have done differently.
When I read it, I was particularly tuned into Le Boyer, so that's kind of picky, I got to admit.
No, no, it really isn't picky. I don't suppose I really thought very much about that, and about that particular method.
Although it seems to me it might actually have been difficult, because given the fact that they were being born in a lab, given the fact that they were being born in a way that human beings haven't been born,
I'm not sure how you would apply Le Boyer to them. There's no mother for them to rest against to speak of.
However, I suppose that maybe the people in the lab could have been a little gentler with them.
Okay, your knowledge of children and the dynamics of sibling interaction came through pretty strongly in this book.
Did you go up with brothers and sisters or have a lot of children around when you were growing up?
Oh yes, oh yes, I did go up with brothers and sisters, and my little brother and sister, I often looked after my little brother and sister as a matter of fact.
And I often babysat. And I suppose that some of the ways in which the people in Cron's lives interact with each other are partly some of the ways in which my family interacted.
I mean, one of the things I noticed when, not when I was growing up but sometime later, was that in a large family I think everyone tends to stake out his or her territory,
and each child sort of becomes an expert or takes over a certain thing that's theirs, and that's not the other kids.
You know, to sort of distinguish yourself from one another.
And when I was writing about the Flintstones in Cron's lives, it didn't surprise me that they would try to do the same thing.
And as a matter of fact, I'd also had experience with twins because I have cousins who are twins and there are twins in my family.
So it's a natural thing, I think.
Well, more so now than it used to be, especially for identical twins, to try to distinguish themselves from each other, to try to do things a little differently so that each one sort of has his or her own identity.
So there is probably some of that experience in the book.
I thought the most ambitious part of the book was the multiple points of view that you took.
Each of the clones had a different characterization, and they were unique, and I would think that would be pretty hard to pull off.
Well, what's funny about that is, I suppose it probably seems as though it would be hard, but consider this, I was a beginning novelist then, hadn't written a book before.
I knew that writing from different points of view was certainly not something that a beginning writer should probably tackle, but at the same time, I was writing about clones.
So I was reasoning this way.
I thought, well, if the points of view seem similar, I can't get called on that or criticized for that because after all, the characters are clones of one another.
So obviously there would be some similarity.
So I didn't have to worry quite as much as I might have if I were writing from completely, from the points of view of completely different people who were unrelated.
I think that's a much more difficult sort of thing.
The fact that they were clones, I think, gave me a little more leeway there.
Again, I harp on this, and I will continue harping on this.
This was a people novel.
You dealt primarily with the feelings of the clones, the isolation, how they felt different, that sort of thing.
And that is different from most science fiction that we read because it's generally the hardware that's concentrated on by the authors now.
Well, I think that's true of a certain kind of science fiction, but I think there's always been science fiction that's concentrated in the other things.
Now, maybe my experience was a little different too because the fact that I didn't start reading science fiction and collater meant that the sorts of things I did read tended to concentrate on people more.
And it was actually a surprise to me when I found out that there were books that concentrated more on technology or engineering sorts of things,
and that just came as a surprise to me when I found out about it, and I found out about it rather late.
So it never occurred to me that novels wouldn't be about people.
I just had no experience with that.
So when I started writing, I think it was a natural thing for me to start writing with that kind of attitude.
I'd always assumed that novels were essentially about people.
Let's think about real life now.
If it were possible to clone people, should there be a moratorium?
Should that be studied?
Are there going to be some dire consequences if we go ahead and do it?
Well, I think when I was writing Clone Rise, I might have been a little more pessimistic than I would be now.
I mean, we've already seen Test Two Babies, and so the world has not exactly gone rushing to the barricades or demanding that this be stopped or anything.
I think most people don't really seem to think that much about it.
It seems reasonable to them that if someone can't have a child in the normal way, that this kind of thing is really perfectly acceptable.
Now, of course, there's a big difference between that kind of thing and cloning.
I think cloning presents a great many more problems that this kind of thing doesn't present.
We haven't even gotten to the point of talking about artificial wounds or any of this sort of stuff.
And I think there are going to be a lot of important issues to resolve.
At the same time, I'm no longer quite so sure that people are going to become completely hysterical about it,
or that it's necessarily going to be bad, or that it's necessarily going to damage us in some way.
Although I do think that as far as cloning in particular is concerned, I'm not sure there's really any constructive reason for bothering with it.
I can't think of too many reasons to clone anyone.
And one of the things that I tried to show in cloned lives at least a little bit is that the notion of cloning people thinking that they are going to be like the person they are cloned from
is really an illusion. They're going to be themselves.
They won't have the same experience. They won't grow up the same way. They won't have the same environment.
And that will create a certain kind of divergence.
I'll make a prediction. The only people that will be interested in cloning are going to be the professional sports teams.
Possibly. Although even there, you can't be sure. You might clone someone.
I mean, there are people who have gone in for athletics very heavily and were very gifted at it,
who, given other circumstances, might have done something else, but just didn't have those circumstances.
Maybe for them, sports was a way out of the ghetto or a way out of poverty or a way to make a living or something that they loved,
something that they just had a real gift for.
I'm not so sure that their children, even if they were cloned, are exactly the same, would go in for sports in the same way.
I don't think that's at all obvious.
Although, of course, if they were brought up with that in mind, then you have another problem.
Are you really giving the person any choice?
And what time he becomes later on, if you deliberately clone someone, bring him up to do a certain thing?
You know, I think there are more issues there, too.
Not that that would stop big-time sports people from trying to clone somebody, especially if they had enough money to throw around.
Yeah, that seems to be where all the money is these days.
Yep.
Okay, the novel, A Sudden Star, is another expansion of a couple of short stories.
Again, the same question. Did you have the novel in mind when you came up with the short stories?
No, the short story was just one short story.
And then, later on, I thought perhaps of writing about some of the other characters in the book.
But I had only written one story when I sat down and tried to figure out what kind of novel I would do.
And so that was more...in that book, which is my second novel, I came a little closer to actually planning a novel as a novel that I had in Qualum's lives.
And, well, I don't really know what else to say about that.
When I read Julio 204, I got the idea that Simon Negron was a pretty rough, tough, callous customer.
But when I read The Sudden Star, especially towards the end of the book, he turned out to be a little bit different than I would have anticipated.
Did he grow as you wrote the novel?
Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I definitely think so. I definitely think so.
And also, well, of course, one of the other things with that character is like a lot of characters that I write about.
I sometimes use it as a starting point. People I know. Very often that's how I'll start.
Although then the characters change. And they are never exact duplicates of anyone I know by the time I finish a book,
because obviously they're going to be changed. The action of the book is going to change and so forth.
But I did start out with a particular person in my home I knew when I wrote about Simon Negron.
And I suppose as I came to know more about him, that was probably reflected in how he was portrayed in the book also.
The principal scenes in that book took place in upstate New York, in New York City, in Miami.
Are you very familiar with the geography of all these places because there was quite a realistic feeling?
Well, I went to every place in the book. Every place that's in the book I went to.
Because I don't like to write about places I haven't been or things I haven't seen.
Now, sometimes it's unavoidable with science fiction, obviously, if you're going to write about the moon or if you're going to write about another planet.
But at least with the solar system there, there's more and more research being done that you can read about.
But as far as Earth goes, I like to visit places that I'm going to write about. I feel much more comfortable doing that.
All of those places are places I've seen.
Subway, unfortunately.
Subway seemed to be breaking down in New York a lot more quickly than I anticipated when I wrote The Sudden Snow.
Okay.
Do you have a location in mind where the farm was, that area, which part of upstate New York that's around?
I thought of Pennsylvania more than upstate New York. I think the farm was probably in Pennsylvania.
I'm right near the Pennsylvania border anyway.
Okay.
At what point in your writing did the mirror star, that idea of that symbolism come into existence?
Well, I thought of that at the beginning.
And originally, I had thought of an actual cosmic disaster which had affected the Earth.
And then I began to think that that really wasn't what I was driving at in the book.
I didn't want to talk about something that's completely outside that destroys things.
Because what has destroyed the Earth in that book is not anything outside of it or anything in the cosmos.
It's the people on Earth that are full of destroyed it.
And the star is simply their explanation because it's a way of evading the responsibility in a sense.
Having seen everything for a parent, people, I assumed, would look for something to blame.
And in this particular case, they blame the star, which really has nothing to do with anything.
It's just what's going to get the blame for the situation.
Was the... excuse me.
That's okay. Go ahead.
That's the hard thing about talking on a phone. You don't get any signals here.
Is the Seton Star your title?
Yes, it is. Although in England, the publisher asked if they could change the title to the White Death
because they didn't want it to sound like a science fiction book.
So they thought the White Death, I guess, sounded more like a non-science fiction book.
I didn't think that was worth arguing about, so I said that's fine.
And I suppose I could have called it the White Death, too, but I didn't.
I think the Seton Star is much more appropriate.
I think it probably is, too. I think it probably is, too.
Although what's interesting about the British publisher picking that particular title is that one of the periods I had done some research on
before doing the Seton Star was the 13th century, and I wanted, in the 14th century,
I wanted to read about a period where everything was breaking down, where society was beginning to collapse.
And particularly the effects that the Black Death had on Europe.
And the reason I was doing that is because I was dealing with another society later on that was breaking down in the Seton Star,
and I wanted to have some sense of what that kind of thing was like historically before I wrote about the future.
And so I suppose in that sense it's appropriate that they wanted to call it the White Death as opposed to the Black Death,
but I think the Seton Star is probably a more pertinent title.
You had some good characters at the end of the book, Paulette and Ildico.
Are you planning to do a sequel? Will we see these characters again?
I'm not planning to do any sequels. If one comes up, that's another matter.
I suppose that one thing about writing is that the characters have lives before you start writing the book,
and then they have lives that go on after you finish the book, and I suppose it's always possible to write each book from some other character's point of view,
and it's always possible to write about what happens to some of the people after you finish one book too.
But if that happens, it happens. I haven't consciously thought of it. That would have to grow by itself, I think.
Okay, your novel Watchstar. That seemed to be a lot different from your other books to me in that it was a much more visual book.
There was a lot of, oh, the cat juggling scene, the visions of the ancient city, the bones all blowing around.
Was this a new facet of your writing?
Well, I'm not sure. I think what was happening there is I was dealing with a character who, well, among other things,
she was different from other characters I'd written about in that she was a member of the illiterate culture.
She was a member of a culture that had certain psychic powers, and I suppose that looking at things through her eyes,
which I had to do as I was writing it, it was a natural thing to see things more visually.
The novel Science Fiction Concept in that book was Life on the Comets, People Settling in the Comets and Living There.
How did that occur to you?
Well, that was an idea I got from Freeman Dyson who said and made the suggestion a few years ago that you could get a comet
and you could settle it and there are enough materials on some of the large comets so that you could have life there.
You could perhaps grow big giant trees and so on. He even talks about growing these big giant trees and having these very green wolves.
I loved that idea for one reason because the one thing I didn't want to do is I didn't want to have my character, Gaia,
make contact with this other civilization which has settled in the comet, and then go up there and wind up in one of these stainless steel futures.
I've just got so sick of those, or plastic futures. They seem to be one or the other. You have the stainless steel ones that are very Art Deco,
and then you have the plastic ones where everybody has tiny micromaniaturized things and weird sorts of decor that look like the inside of McDonald's or something.
I didn't want to write about that kind of future society. I wanted to have something a little different.
In fact, what I wound up with was having a comet society which is actually very much like living in a garden or living in a jungle
or living in a natural environment in a way even though it's a very unnaturally created environment.
It's just appealed to me more than writing about the other kind of future, I suppose, or the other kind of possible future world.
With all the clone novels and stories that we've seen, nobody has ever expressed the fear which you did when Gaia was talking when, is it Raiho?
That's how I pronounced his name. And the Té were, after he had died, and she was saying that they would implant another memory in his body.
And Gaia was arguing that that wouldn't be Raiho. It has its memories, but his soul is gone. He's gone.
And I'd never seen anybody write that, although that had occurred to me, that the essence or whatever the person would be gone.
And I was glad to see that discussed for a change.
Yes. I mean, you could, well, you can call it a soul if you want, or you could call it simply the memories and the essence, I suppose,
or whatever is in the person. The fact of the matter is, if you take any body, I think, and strip it completely of its memories, its experiences, and so on,
even if you plant something in there that takes place, that has all the memories, now everyone else will treat the person exactly the same way.
There won't be any difference, probably, as far as they're concerned. The person will be the same to them.
But it's not the same person. I think that's probably obvious. I don't know. I know that it's a lot more popular to assume that it would be the same person,
but it wouldn't be the same person. I just don't think so.
So Raiho really is dead, as far as I'm concerned. The characters who went through that book by that time is actually gone,
even though there will be another Raiho who will go about his business, who will have all his memories, and so on.
Now, some people have written about matter transmitters who've talked about this, too. If you send somebody through a matter transmitter,
which is another sort of problem also, and you have somebody at the other end who's just duplicated from the pattern, is that really the person?
I have a person died and another person been created to take his place.
Something they never discussed on Star Trek as far as I know.
Yeah, Captain Kirk was gone in the first episode, I guess.
Okay, the golden space. That had shades of cloned lives in that it was about a group of, concerned a group of children that were different
and perceived themselves as different. Did this kind of idea occur to you when you were doing cloned lives, or did the embryonic stages of it hit you then?
No, actually, what happened with that story is it's unusual in one sense, because usually I write stories without regard to where I'm going to sell them until after I finish them.
In this particular case, Jack Dam was doing an anthology. He was doing it on the theme of immortality, and he had asked several writers for stories for the book.
He wanted long stories.
And so I thought about the topic, and I said, well, immortality, I don't know if there's really anything to write about immortality.
I really didn't think there was. It just didn't seem that interesting to me.
And after I thought about it for a while, I finally decided maybe I would try writing a long story about it.
I was more interested, not even in the immortality theme, but in the theme of what would you do if you were immortal, and that was already a given.
And you were beginning to get tired of things, and what kind of children might you raise, and so on and so forth.
I didn't really think of it as an outgrowth of qualms lies at all, although I suppose some of the same concerns must have been there, and I must have been sort of chewing them over in my mind without really realizing it.
And so I wrote the first part of the Golden Space, the renewal, as a short novel for the anthology, sort of stimulated me to think about the subject a little bit.
And I figured that would be the end of that, too. I guess it was another situation like qualms lies. I thought, well, that's that.
I've written that short novel, and I probably won't have anything more to say about this, but later on I found other things I wanted to write.
The Summer's Dust section I originally didn't write as a part of that book at all, either. That's another thing, even though it became part of the book.
I wrote that as a separate story, and I knew it was dealing with the same world, but I just thought it was going to be a separate story and not part of the novel.
But later on I decided to incorporate it, since I wanted to use one of the characters later on.
Okay, you just answered my next question.
Okay, the heart of the novel is immortality, and then with aging and growing old, that sort of thing thrown in.
I would think that this is where your philosophical background would have really been helpful, as opposed to those that don't have that kind of background, and just to think about these sorts of things.
Well, I don't know. Well, in the case of immortality, I'm not so sure, because that has been such a popular thing for people to think about since probably forever.
I mean, people have always been thinking about that. There have always been stories about people who were immortal or thought for immortality or whatever.
The thing is, what to do when you actually have that is another problem. Maybe there has something to do with it.
In the latter stages of the book, the character Domingo is explaining to the people that he's captured or is treating to his hospitality.
He's talking about his village, and he's talking about the people in his village, that they have divided minds, and that their minds talk and voice each other.
So immediately, to my mind, came this book by Julian James called The Origin of Conscious and the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind.
Oh, yes. I definitely incorporated that book. I had read that book a couple of years earlier, and I drew on it for some of the inspiration.
Although I'm a little dubious about some things in that book, although it can still be useful for a novel, even though I'm somewhat dubious about not necessarily about the theory itself,
but about his notion that people as recently as 3,000 years ago might have been in that state.
That I consider more dubious, and I found his analysis of the Iliad somewhat unconvincing. I don't even know if he knows Greek. I found it a very, very strange thing.
And I don't know any classicists who would buy that part of the argument at all.
But as an idea, it's very intriguing. It does have the virtue of explaining a lot of things that would otherwise be unexplainable.
And for the purpose of this book, I thought maybe I would do a little bit using it.
I'm glad I mentioned that book because I've never had any feedback from anybody else that read it, and I thought it was a neat theory.
I don't believe it, but it sure sounds nice, and I was glad to see it in your book. I thought that might have been where it came from or that helped.
I don't know if I have enough originality to think of it differently, so...
Okay, now I have another sort of trivia question. Since I read either for the first time or reread, are your works together in a pretty short period of time?
One thing I couldn't help noticing, I started counting them, and about 29 people in the books that you've published have red hair.
I was just going to make that comment and see if that was something conscious or something...
I'm sure that's not conscious, except, well, I have had red-haired friends, of course, and I have known many people with red hair.
Whether or not... well, I suppose I could always do an analysis and see how many people have red hair, how many people have blonde hair, how many people have black hair, how many people are Caucasian, how many people are black, and so forth.
If I did a whole list of these things, I don't know if they would reflect their proportions in the population enough, and I don't know if it really matters.
I don't know if I have more redheads in there than are in the population as a whole. Maybe I do.
No, I just had to ask that. I noticed it, and I didn't know if there was some secret signal there.
I didn't know there were that many.
Okay, I kind of want to switch tracks here. You are better known in some circles as an editor and an anthologist.
I think that's something that science fiction fans know very little about.
So could you give us kind of a cradle to grave description of how one goes about editing a book from the idea to getting the people to do it for you?
You think we ought to change tapes?
As for how long this answer is going to be.
Okay, well this will be a long answer or a short answer.
Oh, well maybe you better change.
Let's change tapes. We've got about five, three minutes worth of tape.
Okay, tape's being changed.